Good afternoon.
I'm Joe Wolfe.
I'm a manager of the
Intel Compiler Software,
sorry about that,
Technical Consulting and
Support Team at Intel.
And I'm Elizabeth Schneider,
and I'm a Technical Consulting
Engineer and Manager in the
Intel Compiler Support Team.
And welcome to our session.
This is Using the
Intel Software Development Products for
Mac OS X.
You know, just wanted to say that,
you know,
we are absolutely thrilled to be here.
It's the first time attending WWDC,
and it's just been
really exciting to see,
you know, just what you're doing with the
new Intel-based Macs and just
the progress that you've made.
This has just been
fabulous for us to see.
I'd also like to thank our hosts,
you know, several people from
Apple that we work with.
Thank you for inviting us to the
conference and allowing us to speak here.
Yeah, as I said,
it's just been a wonderful experience.
But let's go ahead and just
see what it is that we're going
to be talking about today.
You know, so, you know, first,
I want to give you, you know,
an understanding of the
software development products
for the Mac OS X that we have.
And I also want to spend a little bit
of time just explaining why Intel is
in the software business at all.
So we're going to spend
a little time there.
Number two,
we're going to talk about how you can use
these tools to build high-performance,
high-performance software.
So looking at the unique performance
capabilities of the tools and just
how you can use them in your software.
And then thirdly,
we're going to look at multi-threading.
You know, with the dual-core capabilities
of the Intel Core Duo,
Core 2 Duo processors,
we want to make sure that you
understand some of the threading
capabilities that we have in the
tools and some of the techniques that
you can use to take advantage of that.
Now, the way this is going to work,
I'm going to be up here talking and
hand-waving and doing some things,
and Elizabeth is going
to be running demos.
She's going to keep me honest,
showing you that I'm just
not making this stuff up.
So, you know,
we're going to have a bunch of demos
of different of the techniques and the
things that we're showing you here.
At the end of this,
we should have plenty of time for Q&A,
and we're looking forward to, you know,
interacting with you some more.
We are also in the
performance lab downstairs.
There's Elizabeth and I,
as well as a number of other
people from the development team
and other of the tools teams,
as well as some application engineers
that have had a lot of experience
helping port and tune applications
for the Mac on the Intel-based Macs.
So, we're looking forward to talking
with you some more there.
Now, to start, I have a question.
How many of you knew that
Intel is a software company?
Wow, okay, that's amazing.
A software company in Intel.
I wasn't sure if, yeah,
I just wasn't sure what the
reaction was going to be to that.
Now, how many of you knew that we have,
you know, Intel compilers, libraries,
or software development products?
Okay.
Oh, very good, very good.
Okay, that's, I was,
I had no idea what the response
to that question was going to be.
That's great to hear that
you've heard about us.
But, you know, still,
I want to give you a little bit of
background of just why we're here and
why software is important to Intel and
why we're in the software tools business.
You know,
we know our processors very well,
and we want to make sure that you get the
maximum performance on your application
utilizing the Intel processors.
So, we don't want you to leave.
Any performance on the table when
you're developing your applications,
because performance translates into
better user experience and just better,
you know,
just a more pleasant experience with the,
you know, with the max.
So we want to make sure that you have
the tools and support and services
that you need to do just that.
We've been in the software business
for quite a number of years developing
these tools just for that reason.
We've also put together, you know,
a whole host of other.
Services, you know, around, you know,
not just the software products,
but around the capabilities
that we have in terms of
tuning and porting experience.
And, you know, so things like the
Intel software network,
which is a web based community for
developers consisting of various
user forums and blogs and just trying
to get trying to bring developers
software developers together for
Intel's products or platforms.
The Intel software college, which is.
A.
Training courses that we can do
on a wide range of topics around
our software around performance
tuning for different processors.
To early access programs looking at,
you know, early, you know,
early Intel hardware and
to Intel solution services.
This is providing consulting services to
help you port and tune your applications.
So it's all predicated on the fact
that we know our processors well and
that we want to make sure that you
are getting the most performance.
So we want to make sure that you are
getting the most performance possible
out of your out of the Intel processors
for your applications on the Max.
And, you know,
to kick this off and just to
illustrate what I'm talking about here.
I wanted to show our first demo.
Elizabeth, if you want to.
Okay, what I have here is I'm going
to be bringing up two windows.
And on the right, this is the POVray.
It's the open source ray tracer,
and it's showing an image
that's being rendered.
And on the right-hand side is showing
that rendering under GCC 4.0.1.
It's using the best options
for the GNU compiler.
And on the left-hand side -- oh,
it already finished.
Well, it's going to restart again.
Took about 20 seconds to run
with the Intel C++ Compiler.
This is version 9.1.
And again, it's using the best options
for the Intel C++ Compiler.
And as you can see,
it's about a 20% speedup in
performance running on the Intel C++
Compiler versus the version
compiled with the GCC Compiler.
So that was about -- so about 20
seconds for the ICC rendering,
and I think I saw it around 29
seconds for the GCC rendering.
So, you know,
about a 25% or 30% performance speedup.
And so if we go ahead and
flip back to the slides,
you know,
that's -- so that's why we're here.
We want to make sure that, you know,
you don't leave any
performance on the table,
that you're getting the maximum
that you can out of these
Intel processor-based Macs.
And, you know, this -- the application
we were showing is,
you know, it's just one application.
We're not saying that it's, you know,
indicative of everything that
you're going to run into.
Your mileage is certainly
going to vary from different
applications and benchmarks.
You know,
but we just want to make sure that you
have some tools available to make sure
that you are getting that performance.
So, now moving into the software
development tools themselves,
there's really three
guiding principles for us.
Number one, as I mentioned, performance,
just making use of the processor,
threading capability is a good example
of some of the new capabilities
of the dual-core processors.
Compatibility is another one.
Now, we know that in order for you to
adopt our tools or use our tools,
it's got to be as easy as
possible for you to use them in
your development environment.
So we've worried a lot about integration
into Xcode and complete interoperability
with GCC and interoperability with
GDB so that you can even mix and
match binaries built with GCC and ICC,
ICC being the Intel Compiler,
and with very little to no
changes to your Makefiles,
to your existing Xcode projects.
So compatibility is
extremely important to us.
And then the third guiding
principle is support.
You know,
we have software experts that are
available for training and for support
and just making sure that the experience
with your tools is what you would expect.
So that's why we're in
the software business:
performance, compatibility, and support.
Now here's the products.
So first, the Intel compilers.
That's our Intel Fortran
as well as C++ compilers.
The performance libraries,
there's two that we're talking about.
This is the Intel Integrated
Performance Primitives,
set of highly optimized threaded
functions dealing primarily with
some multimedia applications.
I'll get into a little
bit more detail later.
And then the Math Kernel Library for
more scientific applications.
A new, what we're calling a new
threading methodology for C++.
Now, you notice here there's
no name on the box.
And, well, as I, you know,
we just talked about Intel being a,
you know,
a hardware and a software company.
Well, we have a lot of
marketing and legal folks,
too,
and they haven't come up with a name yet.
And they've been worried,
trying to decide on
one for several months.
And, yeah, marketing and legal,
you can't live with them,
can't live without them, I guess.
Anyway, it's all about, again,
bringing the performance to the Mac OS X.
So, I'll go into a little bit
more detail then on what the
compilers are about here.
So, first of all, how many people here
are Fortran programmers?
Okay, there's a, all right, there's,
you know,
someone waving his hand in the front row.
Okay, so maybe about 20 or so.
Okay, C++.
Okay, pretty much everybody else.
All right.
Let's see, how about Objective-C?
Okay, a lot there, kind of in between,
yeah.
All right, okay,
just wanted to get a feel for that.
So our Fortran Compiler
supports all the basic,
all the, you know,
the common standards now,
or the standards now,
except we have not implemented
all of Fortran 2003.
That's going to be a while.
There's some object-oriented
features in Fortran 2003 that,
you know, we're looking at.
We don't know when we'll be able
to get some of those implemented.
But 77, 90, 95,
and then some other common extensions
that you see in a lot of scientific
computing and various applications.
The C++ Compiler is fully
ANSI ISO compatible.
[Transcript missing]
Then the next set of optimizations are
really oriented around multi-threading.
So we'll get in a little bit more
detail later in the presentation.
Auto-parallelization, OpenMP,
the OpenMP standard for the multi-core.
And then we also care a lot about making
sure that for floating-point applications
or floating-point intensive applications,
you have some ways of controlling
precision versus optimization.
And there are some models
that you can specify there.
Other things that are,
two other tools that are in the
package in the compiler product.
With our code coverage
and test prioritization,
what these are, they are,
these are tools that will
use the profile-guided data,
so the runtime feedback that we get
through the profile-guided optimization,
and be able to pinpoint functions and
basic blocks within those functions
that have been hit or touched by,
you know, the,
whatever your QA tests are, for example.
So, depending on the workloads that you
provide your application in your testing,
we can then provide you
information about the coverage,
how well you tested,
as well as offer advice on
which applications or which
tests did better or worse,
and help you with that prioritization.
So, it's a little bit,
it's an interesting use of the
runtime feedback that we get.
And then finally, the Intel Debugger.
It's a highly, well, it's a,
it's a debugger, GDB compatible,
command line compatible.
Intended for, you know, primarily,
you know, very good with optimized
and threaded applications.
So, it's very good for debugging
those types of applications.
Now,
a little bit more on the environment.
[Transcript missing]
And then finally, universal binaries.
We are only an Intel processor
targeting compiler.
We don't support PowerPC.
So for universal binaries,
you can build the
PowerPC version with GCC,
build the Intel version with ICC,
and then using either Xcode
or LiPo from the command line,
you can build your
universal binary that way.
So we work out of Xcode.
We are trying to be completely
interoperable with GCC in
the Xcode environment.
And that's some of our
guiding principles there.
And then this slide,
so this is just an example
of some more performance.
We're looking at specint, rate,
and specfp, the ICC 9.1 compiler on the
Core Duo processor on Mac OS X.
This is something we
measured this past spring,
compared to the GCC 4.0 compiler.
And we're running at,
this is a comparison of what
we call base optimization.
And really what that means is
the best optimizations that
we can find on both compilers.
And in specint, specint rate,
it's about a 50% faster.
In specfp, it's about 47% faster.
So, you know, again,
this is just a benchmark.
Your mileage is gonna vary, but this is,
you know, this is something that,
you know,
that we are concerned about and making
sure that we maintain a performance lead
and that you get the best performance
possible for your applications.
And this is an example of how, you know,
of where we are today versus GCC.
So that was the compilers.
Excuse me.
So the Intel Performance Libraries.
So the two libraries... Excuse me.
Yep.
So first, the Intel Integrated
Performance Primitives.
So as I mentioned,
these are the libraries that we
produced are intended for some
specific application domains.
And for IPP,
or the Integrated Performance Libraries,
these are highly tuned for the
function domains of signal processing,
digital imaging, cryptography,
a whole host of different
functional domains.
And just like MKL,
these libraries are already threaded.
And so at runtime,
the libraries will determine what
sort of processor you're running on,
whether it's a Core Solo or Core Duo,
and be able to implement the right thing.
And also,
even from the Core to the Core 2
microprocessor is the same thing.
It can detect which
one you're running on,
so you don't have to worry
about porting your application.
It's just the library at runtime
will detect which processor
and do the right thing there.
Now,
MKL is targeted for the scientific side.
And so it's a little bit more
complex than the other libraries.
But it's a little bit more
And so at runtime,
the libraries will determine what
sort of processor you're running on,
whether it's a Core Solo or Core Duo,
and be able to implement the right thing.
And also,
even with the core to the Core 2
microprocessor is the same thing.
applications, you know,
basic linear algebra libraries,
SPAR solvers, FFTs, you know, it's,
again, all of these are threaded.
The team spends a lot of time just,
you know,
looking at these guys just love assembly,
and it's going to be,
it's pretty hard to beat them.
As we're going to see in our example,
you know, even the compiler with full
vectorization and optimization,
it's pretty hard to beat, say,
MKL in some examples here.
So, you know, we'll see that.
And I said they're already threaded.
So this is an example of just
the scaling that you can see with
MKL going from a single threaded to
two threads on a Core Duo processor.
And you can see that when you get into,
this is for a matrix multiply,
a double precision matrix multiply.
And when you get into
the higher matrix sizes,
we get almost perfect scaling
going from about one and a
half gigaflops up to three.
So again, this is,
the libraries provide you with a way
to get arguably the best and optimal
performance as well as threaded
performance out of these applications.
So with that,
I want to go ahead and we'll do a
demo of our integration into Xcode.
And before we switch to the MacBook,
oops, we already switched.
Okay.
uh... could we have the
presentation back please
Thank you.
Okay.
So before we go to the demo,
we just wanted to show you
what code we're working on.
This is just a simple matrix multiply.
You can see we're, you know,
at the top or in the middle
is a triple nested loop where
we're doing the matrix multiply.
The arrays are a size about 800.
I think they're all 800.
And what we're going to be
doing is showing the compiler,
or we're going to be showing some
things with the Xcode integration.
And then as we go
through the presentation,
we'll be optimizing this with
the Compilers Vectorizer and MKL,
and we'll see how we do as we go.
Okay.
Great.
Well, look at this.
I brought up the Xcode,
and I happen to have that same source
that Joe just showed in the presentation.
And I wanted to take a look at it.
It is the same source.
We'll have two different code
paths here defined by an ifdef,
the MKL.
So I want to point this out.
We'll be using it throughout
the demo this afternoon.
I want to first give you a little bit of
overview of our integration with Xcode.
And I'll go ahead and bring up the
target window and take a look at that.
As you can see,
we have the Intel C++ Compiler
here under the collections.
And we have several subsets,
and I'll go through
just a couple of them.
First, there's the general,
and here you can set
your optimization level.
I have it set for dash O2,
which is optimized for speed.
This is our default optimization.
If you were to compile at the
command line and you didn't
specify any optimization,
you would get dash O2,
which is optimized for speed.
You can... compile with dash
O0 with no optimizations,
or O1 for size, or you can add O3,
which is the maximized speed
with high level optimizations.
Now, I also wanted to show
you the optimizations.
We have a checkbox here that I'll
be showing a little bit later in the
presentation for parallelization.
We also have the preprocessor,
where we'll be setting our preprocessor
definition for MKL as well.
And finally,
one more I want to show you is
the diagnostics reports that
you can get from the compiler.
There's an auto-parallelizer report,
and I'll be showing
that a little bit later.
And then there's a report of
vectorization diagnostics.
Right now,
I have that set to VEC report 2,
and I'll be showing those
configurations as well.
So let's go ahead and
run our application.
We're going to bring up
the build results window.
Now,
go ahead and do a clean just to make sure
there's nothing lurking on the system.
I'm building at the
default optimization level,
so let me go ahead and do that build.
And that build's done.
Let's go ahead and run the application.
So this is a small matrix multiply.
And it doesn't take too long.
There we go.
It finishes in about 8.93 seconds,
so about approximately nine seconds.
I see there's some messages that
something didn't get vectorized.
Yeah,
we'll talk about that in a few minutes,
Joe.
So hold that thought for just a minute.
Well, so are you going to be able to
do better than 8.93 seconds,
do you think?
In fact, yes,
I will be able to do better.
Okay, okay.
All right, well,
just take that matrix multiplier.
We ought to be able to
do a little bit better.
Okay.
All right, thank you.
So let's go back to the slides.
There we go.
OK.
All right,
so now we're going to talk about
just how we use the compilers in the
libraries to get this performance.
Now, the first thing is with the core
architecture and the Core 2 architecture,
the key for performance is,
especially for computationally
intensive applications,
is utilizing the
streaming SIMD extensions.
This is the instructor set architecture
that consists of a number of instructions
that deal with single instruction,
multiple data types,
as well as the operations therein,
and as well as the register set
that holds these data types.
Now, the data types that we're
talking about are anywhere from
integers from chars to short,
int, long, as well as even up to 128-bit
integer for some logical operations.
And then for floating point,
what's encapsulated by the
SSE instruction set and register
set are the single precision or
double precision floating point.
So the challenge for the compiler is to
convert your loops or different parts
of your application into the SSE code,
and that's what the process
of vectorization is.
Now, there are other methods.
And I think on the PowerShell,
there's a lot of other methods.
PowerPC with AltaVec,
you could use Intrinsics or Assembly.
Both of those are available with the
Intel compiler and on the IMAX today.
However, the recommended way is using the
Intrinsics or the Vectorizer.
We don't want you writing in
Assembly unless you absolutely have to.
It's just not a portable way to go.
So let's look at how vectorization works.
You know, it's really, you know,
the case where we want the
compiler to do the work.
And what you need to worry about with
vectorization and what the compiler
needs to worry about primarily is just,
you know,
how to break what's called memory,
you know, just memory dependencies,
you know,
across iterations of the loops or,
just amongst the data that one sees
or that the compiler sees in the loop.
So the compiler has to worry about,
you know, iteration dependence, you know,
is the data,
is data written or read in one
iteration that's used in the next?
Or if there's, you know,
memory disambiguation or pointer
aliasing that will prevent,
you know,
that will cause the compiler to have to
err on the conservative side and just
assume that there's a dependence here
and not be able to vectorize the loop.
You know, we also have to look at,
you know,
whether there's enough work in the loop
to... to warrant doing the vectorization.
So there's some things that we have to...
that the compiler has to worry about.
You know, there's other things like,
you know, well, fortunately with some
of the transcendentals,
so if you have calls to various
intrinsics in your functions like sine,
cosine, etc., you know,
the compiler can also deal with
those and vectorize those through
what we call the... our small,
our short vector math library
that's part of the MKL that
actually ships with the compiler.
So let's look at how you can understand
what some of these dependencies are
when you do see these un-vectorized
messages like what we saw in the example.
We have what we call our optimization
reports that will give you
different levels of detail from yes,
it vectorized to no, it didn't,
and here's exactly why.
And we also have some pragmas or
directives that you can give to the
compiler to give it hints on what to do.
You know,
particularly when you're dealing
with C++ and dealing with pointer
dereferencing or aliasing.
You know, in some cases,
it's just a reason to program in Fortran,
you know.
You just don't have to worry
about pointers that way.
But in reality, though, we do.
And so you can use the IVDEP pragma
with C++ or with Fortran telling
the compiler that without,
you know, that I know my code,
don't worry about it, you know,
go ahead and vectorize my loop.
And then for letting the compiler to
disambiguate between pointer references,
we can use the restrict keyword.
And that will tell the compiler that
the data to which this pointer points
can only be accessed by this pointer.
So it's just restricting the use of the
pointer and ensuring there's no aliasing.
Now in the Intel Compiler,
as Elizabeth mentioned,
the vectorizer is on by default.
So at -02 is our default setting,
and so the vectorizer will be turned on.
You can set different
optimization levels.
01 is what we would call, you know,
optimize for size or, you know,
smaller binaries.
We won't do much inlining, for example.
02 is where we'll do some higher-level
loop transformations to maybe be able to
better vectorize your code or better lay
out your code for memory and cache usage.
And then, of course, we have the advanced
optimization switches of IPO,
the inter-procedural
optimization I mentioned earlier,
the whole program optimization,
as well as profile-guided optimization,
which is really intended or very
useful for branchy code or code
devs to make a lot of difference.
decisions.
So that's how the compiler does it,
and we'll see the example of the
vectorization here in a minute.
For the libraries, it's pretty simple.
You just replace whole sections of
code with a call to the library,
and you let the library do the work.
So here is an example
of a matrix multiply.
Again,
we just replace it to the call to the
CBLAS DGEM for the C version of the MKL,
or for the C version of the entry point.
And again,
the libraries are going to arguably
give you the best performance and,
of course,
the best portability across processors,
as well as be already threaded for you.
So with that,
let's go ahead and see how we can do on,
we were at, let's see,
8.93 when we last left.
That's right, Joe.
And we had this message here.
Loop was not vectorized.
Consistence of vector dependence.
Wow, that, I wonder if we can do better
in terms of a diagnostic.
Well, it turns out that we can.
Let me bring up the target
window again in diagnostics.
And instead of vec report 2,
I'm going to go to vec report 3,
which is going to give me some dependency
information diagnostics as well for
those loops that did not vectorize.
Let me go ahead and close this
and go back to my build results.
And I'll do a clean because
I didn't actually touch the code.
And now let me build.
Oh, I've got another message now.
Vector dependence assumed
anti-dependence between size 2,
line 27, and z, line 28.
I think it's time to
take a look at the code.
So I'll bring that up here.
And if you take a look at size 2,
it's here.
And here's z that it's talking about.
And then size 2, oh,
it happens to be a global variable.
And we're passing in z.
So the compiler is going
to play it conservative.
It's not going to vectorize that loop.
But hey, wait a second.
I see an integer here
that's locally defined.
Let's change.
Let's use z2 instead of
size 2 and see what happens.
So let me go ahead over here and build.
And of course, I want to save.
OK, so then let's go ahead and run this
now that I've made that change.
Oh, look.
And our message is now we've
got that loop vectorizing.
So great.
All right.
So let's go ahead and run.
Good, good.
That looks better.
So, 4.78 seconds.
So once we vectorize that
main loop in our application,
we went from about 9 seconds to
a little less than 5 seconds.
Now, if you remember the code,
we've got this set up so we
could also call MKL instead of
our hand-coded matrix multiply.
So I'd like to try that now.
So I'm going to go back to here,
the targets, and I'm going to set the
preprocessor to have MKL.
Okay, and then go back here and do
another clean and a build.
And then let's run it now.
Oh, I think it finished on us.
Scroll bar up.
It did.
Let me run it one more
time so you believe me,
it did run.
There we go.
1.75 seconds.
That's using the MKL library.
So if we compare that with
our vectorized version,
we were at 4.78 seconds.
So using the MKL call for matrix
multiply significantly speeded
up this small application.
Wow.
Okay.
So from 8.93.
All right.
Excellent.
Okay,
so 8.93 down to about less than five
with the compiler's vectorization.
Cut that in half, and then that was an
amazing speed-up by MKL.
Good job, library guys.
Yeah.
Okay, well, thank you very much.
Let's see.
So let's move on to the next topic then.
So multi-threading for dual-core.
So I'm going to talk about three
things here-- auto parallelization,
or what the compiler can do
automatically for you for parallelism.
Then we'll talk about the OpenMP,
the OpenMP standard or
directives that you can use.
And then we'll talk about this
unnamed parallel programming model.
So first, auto-parallelization.
You know, this is kind of the holy
grail of compiler technology,
you know, where the compiler will
do everything for you,
and, you know,
including parallelize your loop.
We've, you know,
over the last several decades, you know,
probably back in the '70s,
when vectorization in
the supercomputing world,
vectorization technology, you know,
became prevalent and pretty well done,
it's always been, you know,
the hope that, you know,
compilers could do just as well
with auto-parallelization or just
being able to parallelize the
loops as well as a vectorizer can.
And, yeah,
I'm not gonna say that our compiler is,
has achieved this state, you know,
but there are simple loops
where the compiler can do this,
as we'll see in our example here.
And it's something that
we're working very hard on.
We are putting a lot of effort into our,
you know, our parallelization technology,
and we wanna know when you do
have loops or applications that
you think can be parallelized,
we wanna know about that to help get the,
help move the technology along.
So we'll see some,
see an example of this in a minute.
But OpenMP, though,
is probably our recommended method
of parallelizing applications.
It's a very well-defined and well-known
standard that's been developed
over the last several decades.
You can see the entire documentation
of the standard and exactly
how it works at www.openmp.org.
But here's some examples
of what it looks like.
How many here have used OpenMP?
So there's a, okay, a few people.
Very good.
So it works for both Fortran and C++.
And basically what you're doing is
providing hints to the compiler to say
what sections of code to parallelize.
And then it also provides
some different primitives,
similar to what you would
do in any threading program,
about locking,
defining critical sections,
defining what data should be private,
or shared amongst tasks.
And it's a fairly simple language
or set of directives that you
can add to your application.
And underlying it is a runtime
library that will do the scheduling
and take care of all of that for you.
So that was the example of a parallel,
the basic operations.
It also defines other operations like
sum reductions or product reductions,
a common loop construct.
And I'll show you a little bit
more about that in a minute.
in various applications.
I said earlier, you know,
there are constructs for critical
sections or defining what data
and when you want to lock it.
[Transcript missing]
And if you notice here,
we have some parallelization
going on in the demo.
Let me make sure it did.
I was looking for one more message.
Probably did not like me closing
out everything like that.
So let me make sure we
got that set over here.
There we go.
We want that switch on as well,
and I think I forgot to do that.
So let's do one more
time through this build.
There we go, that's what I wanted to see.
Loop was auto-parallelized.
So let's go ahead and run this now.
- Now it also says that we
vectorized the loop too,
huh?
- That's right,
we vectorized our inner loop and
we auto-parallelized the outer
loop of our matrix multiply.
- All right, that's just the way
it's supposed to work,
okay.
- So let's go ahead and run that.
5.04 seconds.
Now as I recall, it was 4.93 vectorizing.
Hmm, I think I want to go out here to
my X window and I want to actually
time the run of it instead.
Okay, now we see that our real
time was 2.55 seconds.
So the clock function that we
were using within Matrix Multiply
is showing the time it took to
execute on both threads combined,
but our real clock time
was only 2.55 seconds.
So there's a little bit
of difference there.
Okay.
Now I want to show you the MKL version.
So let me get back over
here and turn back on MKL.
So that's an important safety tip.
When you are timing multi-threaded
applications on the Core Duo or
the dual-core processors,
you need to think about what the
system clock is reporting in terms of
clock ticks versus the real user time.
So that's what we showed here.
What the system clock reported
was the total of the clock
ticks from both threads.
In reality, though,
the user time or the real
time was half or close to half
from the actual performance.
Okay, now I've built it to go to the
Math Kernel Library routine.
Now notice that we didn't get any
vectorization or parallelization
here because we're calling
the Math Kernel Library.
But back in our other routine,
we did have some
initialization of our data,
and there we did get auto-parallelization
and the vectorization taking place.
So let's go ahead and run.
I'm going to go ahead and run out here
because we already know we'll have that
clock problem if we run out of Xcode.
Whoa, it's already done,
but it says 1.89 seconds,
and I think we were at 1.75 seconds.
Hmm, okay.
So what's going on here?
Well, it turns out that by default,
the Math Kernel Library is running
single-threaded because the
Math Kernel Library does not want to
conflict if you're using something
like a single-threaded library.
Okay.
So it's something like the
MPI for doing your threading.
So by default, it's single-threaded.
But let me set a variable here.
And then let me run again.
Oh, it's done, and it's just one second.
So if you recall,
our non-vectorized matrix
multiply was about nine seconds.
When we vectorized,
I think it went to about five seconds.
Our auto-parallelized version
was about 2.6 seconds.
And now when we threaded MKL,
we get down to a second
for our matrix multiply.
Excellent.
Wow, so nine seconds down to basically
one second with MKL and the compiler.
Excellent.
I think that'll work.
That'll work.
Thank you, Elizabeth.
Okay, so one more thing to
talk about for threading,
and this is our new parallel
programming model for C++.
So what this is is a
template-based runtime library.
You know, we're providing the runtime
library that manages scheduling
and various other things,
as we'll see,
as well as the header files and
et cetera that define all the
constructs and the concepts here.
And what it allows you to do
for C++ programs is define the,
is to define your
parallelism in terms of,
you know, data,
or in terms of the tasks or patterns
that you want to operate on that data,
as opposed to looking at, you know,
worrying about, you know,
just how to thread it or
looking at more of a functional
decomposition of your threading.
So, you know, it's similar to, like,
the standard template library.
You know,
if you look at different... You know,
if you look at different iterators
in there where you can operate on,
you know, generic data types, you know,
it works a lot in the same way,
as we'll see in a minute.
So it's not necessarily
intended to provide,
you know, greater performance, perhaps,
than, say, OpenMP or the Pthreads,
but what it is intended
to do is help you with,
you know, just greater productivity,
ease of use, compared to Pthreads,
as we'll see in these examples.
So with... And since you are programming
in more of a data parallel manner,
or since you are programming
in a data parallel manner,
as opposed to functional, you know,
that is how you get greater scalability,
and you can get performance
that way as well.
So this is just an example of
one of the concepts that we've
defined in the threading library.
This is the parallel four,
fairly synonymous with the
OpenMP parallel do loop or
do constructs that we saw.
But what this is doing is very similar,
as I said,
to the standard template library.
You define what data you want to work on,
and then you think about how you want to,
you know, the functions or the operations
that you want to work on that data.
And just let it,
let the parallel four or the
threading runtime library worry
about the scheduling and how
it's going to allocate the data.
work on your data.
[Transcript missing]
Now, this is, so that was in a
one-dimensional iteration space.
Now, if you think back again
to the Pavre example,
a quicker way to do,
or a more optimal way to do the rendering
is to break it up into larger chunks
and just farm out more and more chunks
or larger chunks of the image to be
rendered by the different threads.
And to do that with POSIX,
you're going to have to
write a fair amount of code,
but with the threading library, again,
you let the runtime library do the work
for you because you've already defined
this for the data or for the different,
for the data sections or the data that
you want the iterator to operate on.
In this case,
the only difference between this and
the one-dimensional iteration space
was the use of this blocked range 2D,
and that's where you tell the,
the runtime library that you are
iterating over a two-dimensional space.
And there are other constructs or
other concepts in the library that,
you know, for different data types
and different dimensions,
et cetera.
Now, you know, again,
what we're showing here,
it's not necessarily, you know,
we're not after, you know,
necessarily a performance improvement,
but a productivity savings and the ease
of use that you can get from doing this.
So let's go ahead and take a
quick look at this Tachyon demo.
You just saw it.
You saw the code that we were showing,
and I think Elizabeth will
show us how it looks.
So what we're first going to do
is we're going to run the serial
version of this Tachyon demo.
So let me go ahead and do the run.
So notice how it's painting.
It's just doing it line by line,
and it will see how it paints
with the new parallel programming
model in just a second,
and we'll also get a timing
here of how much this is
taking for the serial version.
Okay, that's completed,
and it took about 16 seconds.
So there's a little pause in here,
and then it'll start painting again.
Now, notice how it's painting.
It's doing it in blocks,
and as it completes,
now we get another timing.
Oh, 7.25 seconds,
so a significant speed-up using the
new Intel Parallel Programming Model.
Let me do this one more time,
just the threaded version.
And notice again how it paints in blocks.
It's doing the 2D,
as Joe was showing the source
for this up on the screen.
And notice at the very end,
it grabs an extra bit of work
ahead of the block below it,
and that's because of how
the scheduling is done.
So it's actually able to do a little
bit of speed-up that way that isn't
possible in the serial version.
And I don't believe it's possible
in the P-Threads version either.
Right.
So.
So again,
certainly you can see the speed-up
from threading going from a
serial to the parallel version.
There is an implementation of the
tachyon using the POSIX threads,
and it's a similar performance to what
we see with the threading library.
But you can see the productivity or the
coding savings that you get using that.
Okay, now, so we've talked about the,
you know, so we talked about the,
you know, the compilers and the basic
functionality or the performance
capabilities of the compilers of
the libraries and the threading.
So, you know,
one last thing we want to talk about is,
you know, just a little bit on how we are
supporting the new Mac Pros,
you know, utilizing the 64-bit
Core 2 Duo processors.
so
You know, really,
the way we're looking at this is,
you know,
we're maintaining the compatibility and
providing interoperability with GCC.
That's still our guiding principle here.
You know, obviously,
we are worrying about performance,
and we're going to deliver that,
and we'll show another example running
on the 64-bit system in a minute.
But the way the compilers
are laid out is,
you know, we're going to offer one
compiler binary for 32-bit,
or for the core processors as, you know,
on the iMacs today.
And then there'll be a different
binary for the 64-bit for the Mac Pros,
and, you know,
that we'll be coming out with.
We'll probably be starting
a beta later in the year,
and, you know, I'll give you some more
details about that in a minute.
But so separate binaries for 32-bit.
So the 64-bit targeting compiler
will have these switches,
and this is just what you
can see in GCC or with Xcode,
you know,
the Xcode that's on the Mac Pros that
you can see down in the lab today.
There's an M32 and an M64 model switch
to determine which you're going to,
you know,
which model you're going to run in.
Universal binaries, of course,
are the same.
You have the Intel compiler
using either Xcode or LiPo.
You know, however you want to run it.
However you want.
Now, one thing that we're providing
in the Intel compilers,
and, you know, that's proven, you know,
very valuable for us in the past in,
you know, helping people port to
64-bit applications.
So we implemented this WP64 option.
You know,
we kind of call it our code clean option.
You know, what that means is helping you,
you know, giving you diagnostics
for when you're using,
you know, maybe mix-matched 32-
and 64-bit pointers.
You know, it's a common error
that you will run into.
As you're porting,
it will give you diagnostics for
those types of situations and others.
So it's very, you know, very useful.
We found it very useful in the past.
And then as far as the ABI for LP64
or longs and pointers being 64,
you know,
we're implementing the same ABI as
what's been implemented in GCC.
And the key things to
note here in the ABI,
I think tomorrow in the
brown bag by Dilip Bandekar,
I think he'll go into more detail.
But I think it's important to
note that we're not going to be
doing a lot of the same stuff.
We're going to be doing
a lot of the same stuff.
But the key thing for
performance is really the,
you know, not in 64-bitness,
but in the fact that there's eight
more XMM registers or the SIMD,
single instruction multiple data
registers on the core two versus
what's on the core processor.
So that allows us to do more
things in the calling conventions.
We have faster calling conventions.
It gives the compiler greater
flexibility for register
allocation and optimization there.
So, you know,
that's really where you see,
where you can see some
significant performance benefits.
Okay, so with that,
I think we have one last demo.
All right, I'm going to move over
now to the Mac Pro,
and what I've got this set up
to do is run the POV bench.
It's going to run in just
command line version.
We did try to do some work
here at the conference to
get it working with graphics,
so you can see the same demo
that you saw on the 32-bit
earlier in the presentation,
that we just had some technical problems
and weren't able to do that for you.
But let me go ahead and run
it over here on the right.
And this is running GCC version 4.0.1.
This is the Apple computer
build of the GCC.
And it's just running the
POV bench benchmark scene.
And it's taking 4.959 seconds.
And over here...
We're running the Intel C++
Compiler for Mac OS,
and it's taking about 4.144.
I want to point out,
this is our 64-bit compiler.
You can see it's version X.X,
so this is a pre-beta compiler
that we're showing here.
And it will go into beta later this fall.
Okay,
so about a 20% performance difference.
But again, these are early copies of
both compilers for the 64-bit.
And as I mentioned,
it will be going to beta with
the Intel Compiler and the
Intel Libraries later in the year.
And I'll give you a website
for how you can get in that.
So, wow, very good.
Thank you very much, Elizabeth.
So I think we're, yeah,
we're at the end here, and I just want to
summarize what we've done.
So we've given you an introduction
to the software development products,
the compilers, libraries,
our new threading library.
And we've talked about, you know, just,
you know,
why Intel is in the software business
and why it's important for us.
And also showed why it's important
for you to be using the best tools
possible to get the maximum performance
out of your applications running
on the Intel processor-based Macs.
You know, we also talked about, you know,
some techniques for you to thread
your applications using AutoParallel,
OpenMP,
and this new threading runtime library.
And then, and we talked also about
the guiding principles,
you know, the, obviously performance,
but we want to maintain
that compatibility.
With the development
environment that you use today,
you know, Xcode,
interoperability with GCC, et cetera.
And then, you know,
the other guiding principle is that,
you know, we back all this up with,
you know,
with expert support and training.
So we want to make sure that
you have what you need to,
you know, to be successful.
So this is our website.
One more thing,
I just want to let you know that,
as I think I said this earlier,
but several of us,
including several engineers,
are in the performance lab
downstairs on the first floor.
And we'll be here through, you know,
all the way until 10 o'clock tonight or,
well, later if you want to buy a beer,
but that's a... And then
tomorrow morning,
there is a, there's another talk by some
of our performance engineers on
looking at a case study of some
performance tuning they did for the,
you know, for the Macs.
And that'll be a very interesting
talk tomorrow at 10.30.
We mentioned Delete Bandercar is
giving a brown bag tomorrow at lunch.
And then, you know, we also want you to,
you know, go to our website and
sign up for future betas.
We don't have any dates that
we could give you now about our
beta program for 64-bit tools.
But you could go here
and put your name down,
and we'll be able to
get in touch with you.
And then one final thing I didn't
put on the slide is that,
but for attendees at WWDC,
we do have some coupons for
the compilers and libraries,
if you're interested, for a 50% discount.
So you can come up and see us afterwards.